[music]
>> Last night, the crying of the children
kept me awake.
And I had a terrible vision.
I saw the fall of our city. Bleached
bones under a harsh sun.
Carthage, gone.
Why would Baal send such a vision?
He's not cruel.
He has watched over us. We have had
victories a plenty in war.
Our merchants sail to all corners of the
world.
And yet now, I fear. I cannot help it.
>> [music]
>> We are the envy of lesser people. They
tell terrible lies about us.
They do not understand, so they lie.
But the Romans,
they are the masters of falsehood.
War will come.
I'm sure of it.
So, I will have no more false visions.
And
I think the children will be quiet
tonight.
For seven centuries, Carthage had forged
an empire which came to dominate much of
the Mediterranean.
Yet from such heights would come a fall
of unprecedented scale.
Just a generation after the nightmare of
Hannibal had terrorized Italy, now it
was the legions whose boots were
touching down upon Africa to return the
favor.
Yet they came not with orders to merely
subjugate.
No.
The army which bore down on Carthage had
but one objective,
the complete and total annihilation of
its foe.
There would be no quarter.
What followed would be one of the most
brutal sieges of antiquity.
This is the history of the third and
final Punic War.
So, if you like stories like these of
grim determination in the face of
overwhelming firepower, you will
absolutely love the Leagues of Votann,
which just dropped for today's sponsor,
Warhammer 40,000 Tacticus.
I've been playing for over 3 years now
and can't get enough of the game's
squad-based tactical battles, which can
be fought across many types of PvE and
PvP game modes.
Now, at this point, I've built out a
killer roster featuring the best of the
best from all the factions. But now, my
defender's heart is dead set on adding
the Leagues of Votann to my collection.
And you can actually get in on the
action yourself with ongoing in-game
release events. Their faction mechanic
has the Kin swapping between powerful
damage-dealing and damage reduction
buffs based on how you use their
abilities. Vynn, for instance, is a
repair bot-summoning healer who can
actually use his active to whip out a
graviton rifle for some really punishing
snipes. I was actually lucky enough to
get him in the February event.
Now, on March 8th, the League's first
legendary champion, Uthar, will be up
for grabs. He's a resilient all-rounder
who grants friendly units extra armor or
extra pierce ratio while triggering a
reasonable active to boost his own
damage-dealing and blocking.
Beyond these two, there are more
characters in store for the Leagues of
Votann, as well as additional units and
machines of war for other factions, like
the Storm Speeder.
I'm especially excited for the March
19th event, where you'll lead the World
Eaters and Black Legion to crush the
blind faith of the Adeptus Sororitas for
a ton of rewards.
Having unlocked most of the characters
and beaten all the campaigns at this
point, I can honestly report, 3 years
in, I still find Tacticus to be a ton of
fun and play almost daily. So, please
consider supporting the channel by
pausing the video now to download
Tacticus using the QR code above or the
link in the description.
Enjoy.
The Punic Wars were civilizational
clashes of epic proportions, whose waves
of violence were driven by both the
macro trends of nations and [music] the
deeply personal motives of individuals.
In the case of the Third Punic War, it
will be worth reviewing both of these
threads which lay the stage for our
story.
Rome's victory [music]
in the Second Punic War had firmly
shifted the power balance between the
two Mediterranean rivals.
Where once there had been geopolitical
parity, now Carthage was clearly
subordinate [music]
on the world stage.
Reduced in its status to that of a mere
friend and ally of Rome.
This new paradigm was laid out legally
with the terms of a peace treaty that
had been signed in [music] 201 BC.
It stipulated the following.
All plunder, all prisoners, [music]
and all war elephants were to be handed
over.
All but 10 triremes of the Punic fleet
were to be demobilized.
All mercenary recruitment of Celts and
Ligurians [music] was forever banned.
All overseas possessions were made
forfeit.
All of Numidia's territory was to be
restored.
All future wars must be approved by
Rome.
All campaigns must be contained to
Africa.
And finally, for the next 50 years,
10,000 silver talents must be paid
annually.
But while such terms are easy to list
off, it's difficult to imagine what this
drastic [music] empire-level disarmament
and deconstruction looked like from the
ground level.
Unfortunately, no Punic sources remain
[music] to tell their side of the story.
We are therefore left with but a few
clues [music]
left by later Roman authors.
Appian, for instance, reports that the
harsh terms of the deal caused a period
of political turmoil among the
Carthaginians.
Many in the public feared that for the
next 50 years they would now be burdened
with double taxation and that in the
event of famine or disaster, aid relief
for the common folk would come second to
the [music] obligations to Rome.
Punic citizens now threatened to burn
down the homes of their leaders,
forcing many to flee while some of those
who remained attempted [music] to seize
on the populist sentiment by whipping up
the crowds from the speakers' platform.
Ultimately, the uprising was put to rest
by the looming threat of further Roman
violence and [music] the influence of
respected leaders who still held sway
with the people.
The great general Hannibal, for
instance, knew well the cost of renewed
war and is said to have literally
dragged down one of the Punic leaders
who had been attempting to resist the
signing of the peace treaty.
Carthage now seemingly resigned itself
to [music] its humiliating fate.
Thus it was that of the three major
factions which were said to rule the
city in the interregnum years,
one favoring Rome, one favoring Numidia,
and one favoring the common people,
none made any moves to break the terms
of the treaty.
As proof of this one point of agreement,
we can imagine that they all
participated in the strict compliance
measures which included hosting Roman
inspectors and sending embassies to
Italy.
But perhaps the most painful obligation
for the leaders of a once great maritime
empire
was to give the final blessings to its
condemned fleet, which had gathered in
the harbors of the city.
Appian claims that on the appointed day,
500 ships were rowed into open water and
set ablaze.
In this conflagration burned the hopes
and dreams of Carthage's rulers.
Yet, to the common citizen, this was
perhaps seen as a cleansing purge of
their leaders' folly.
What had they gained from these years of
endless war?
Perhaps now, finally, attention would be
paid to their needs at home.
Such popular disaffection with the
ruling oligarchy was seized upon by
Hannibal,
who rode the wave to become elected
suffete in 196 BC.
From here, he worked to strengthen the
popular assembly, to overhaul the city's
finances, and to go after the elite for
their corruption.
While Hannibal would eventually be
chased into exile by Rome and his
rivals, the reforms seem to have helped
Carthage regain its footing.
As its industrious people focused on
what they did best, lucrative trade
routes were revived and agriculture
boomed.
Prosperity soon returned.
In this period, archaeology reveals a
fresh wave of new construction across
the city,
from homes and temples to the grand
Cothon Harbor.
So quickly did Carthage rebound
>> [music]
>> that within just a decade, it was
already prepared to pay off the
remaining 40 years of its war debt.
Unfortunately, this renewal would draw
the wary attention of its friend and
ally across the seas.
Let us now briefly turn our attention to
the affairs [music] of Rome.
Victory in the Second Punic War had left
Rome with a massive haul of wealth,
slaves, and territory.
Most importantly though, it had left
Rome with one of the most
battle-hardened generations ever in the
Republic's history.
Now addicted to the spoils of victory,
this war machine would be unleashed
across the Mediterranean.
What followed would be a dizzying number
of campaigns over the next 50 years.
To briefly enumerate them, this would
include
the First Macedonian War,
the Second Macedonian War,
the Spartan War, the Boeotian War, the
Seleucid War, the Aetolian War,
the Galatian War,
the Celtiberian War,
the Third Macedonian War,
the Illyrian War,
the Lusitanian War,
the Numantine War,
and the Fourth Macedonian War.
Yet, as the years dragged on, the
veterans of the Second Punic War would
gradually be attritioned or aged out of
the military.
Such a loss was not easily replaced at a
time when armies were still being levied
and disbanded on an annual basis without
the continuity of the professionalized
institutions which might otherwise
maintain the skills of its armed forces.
[music]
Such a degradation of Rome's military is
noted by our ancient sources who bemoan
the difficulty of raising men and waging
efficient campaigns.
Yet, as this old guard dwindled, [music]
a few remained to carry on the torch.
Most notable among them would be Cato.
Born in 234 BC, he had been in his 20s
during Hannibal's invasion [music] of
Italy and had seen his fair share of
battles against the African menace.
By 151 [music] BC, Cato was now an
83-year-old senator.
He stood as a reminder of the old
austere ways of the past in an era when
the descendants of Rome's conquering
generation was seen as increasingly soft
and decadent.
Thus it was that the elder statesman
[music] clung to his hatred of Carthage,
chastising those who ignored the
resurgent [music] threat in favor of
their inherited luxuries.
Such was Cato's persistence that he
famously [music] ended his speeches, no
matter the occasion, with the cry,
"Carthago delenda est."
Carthage must [music] be destroyed.
For years, these calls fell on deaf
ears.
Until one day, [music] an opportunity
arose to see the deed done.
Across the seas, another vestige of the
Second Punic War would be the one to
light the spark of war.
Masinissa, the king of Numidia, was
approaching his 90s.
In his younger days, he had switched
sides to support the Roman invasion of
Africa,
helping them to break the back of
Carthage at the Battle of Zama.
In doing so,
>> [music]
>> Masinissa had reaped the benefits of his
neighbor's downfall
and for years had done everything in his
power to further chip away at his
knee-capped rival.
In 150 BC, tensions reached new heights
as the Numidians launched bold raids
into Punic territory,
ravaging the lands and laying siege to
the city of Oroscope.
Carthage had had enough.
They now raised an army to finally punch
back.
This was done without first [music]
seeking Roman approval or arbitration, a
mandate of the terms of their treaty.
Such behavior was a reflection of the
growing frustration of the
Carthaginians.
The Romans had shown a [music] bias
towards the Numidians in prior
arbitrations
and had no incentive to green-light
[music] the raising of an army to defend
themselves.
Thus it was that the populist faction of
Carthage kicked out those among them who
pleaded to keep the shackles on and now
made ready for war.
They did so by raising a force of 25,000
foot and 400 horse, many of whom were
said to have been raised from the
citizenry itself.
Appian reports that this force was
further swelled by allies to a total
strength of 58,000 men.
These successfully pushed back the
Numidian raiders, defeating them in a
series of skirmishes.
However, the Punic army was soon lured
into a pursuit of the main enemy body,
which had retreated into rugged terrain.
It was here that Massinissa offered
battle. What followed was a day-long
clash.
Yet, as the sun set, neither side could
[music] claim victory.
In the aftermath, Punic and Numidian
negotiations took place with the Roman
nobleman, Scipio Aemilianus,
acting as an intermediary.
Ultimately, no progress was made.
What followed was an uneasy stalemate as
the Numidians encircled the Carthaginian
camp.
It seems that neither talk nor action
could break the impasse.
Both sides were determined to simply
starve the other off the field.
The Punic commander reportedly believed
he had the advantage of supplies and the
strength to punch out of the
encirclement when necessary.
However, in this he had underestimated
the enemy and soon found himself truly
trapped.
Appian paints the [music] unfolding
scene.
Quote,
"Hunger wasted [clears throat] Hasdrubal
and the [music] Carthaginians and being
much debilitated, they were no longer
able to assault the enemy. First, they
ate their pack animals and after them
their horses and they boiled their
leather straps for food.
They also fell sick of various diseases
due to lack of food, want of exercise,
and the season.
For they were enclosed in one place and
in a contracted camp.
A great multitude of men exposed to the
heat of an African summer.
When the supply of wood for cooking
failed, they burned their shields.
They could not carry out the bodies of
their dead because Massinissa kept
strict guard nor could they burn them
for want of fuel.
So, there was a terrible pestilence
among them
as a consequence of living in the stench
of putrefying corpses.
Thus, did Carthage plead for terms.
They would be allowed to return home
with the relinquishing of their arms,
the exchange of prisoners, and a promise
of a 50-year war indemnity to
Massinissa.
However, as the defeated army now
marched solemnly home,
their helpless column was set upon by
one of the Numidian cavalry commanders.
From the slaughter that ensued, few made
it out alive.
The oath-breaking enemy now had free
reign over Punic lands
and the Romans showed no signs of
reigning them in.
Given all this, it should be no surprise
that Carthage was in a state of deep
frustration.
Yet still, they feared the ire of Rome.
A delegation was sent to Italy pleading
for them to do something about
Massinissa's invasion.
But the senators merely [music] flipped
the table on them. How dare Carthage
raise its arms without Roman approval?
To this, the envoys offered a defense.
When this was rejected, they then
[music] asked how they might atone for
their sins.
Rome merely answered,
"You must make it right with the Roman
people."
A second embassy was sent to clarify
this chilling remark.
Apparently, they came with offers to pay
a large fine, to give up territory, and
[music] to do anything that might ensure
peace between Rome and Carthage. But
again, they were met with the cold
response,
"You know what you must do."
One can only imagine the fear this must
have struck in the hearts of the
Carthaginians.
The implied threat was further magnified
by reports that armies were being raised
across Italy.
The reason given was equally ominously,
"In case of an emergency."
Such matters justifiably spread panic
across the shores of Africa. Many in
Carthage fell into deep debate about
what to do next. Meanwhile, others had
already sensed the way the winds were
blowing and took action. Most decisive
among them was Utica, the second largest
city in the region, which now [music]
preemptively declared itself for Rome.
Thus were the powers of Italy gifted
with a [music] fortified beachhead into
the enemy's land.
For even the most hesitant senators,
such an opportunity was impossible to
resist.
Carthage was seemingly being offered up
to them on a silver platter.
And so, without a moment's delay, they
voted to declare war.
Appian recounts the ensuing rush of
activity, quote,
"They immediately dispatched [music] the
consuls in command of the forces, Manius
Manlius having charge of the foot
soldiers,
and Lucius Marcius [music] Censorinus of
the fleet.
And they gave them secret orders not to
desist from the war [music] until
Carthage was razed to the ground.
After offering sacrifice, they sailed
for Sicily, intending to cross over
thence to Utica.
There they were conveyed in 50
quinqueremes and 100 hemioliae, besides
many open boats and transports.
The army consisted of 80,000 infantry
and about 4,000 cavalry, all the very
best.
There was a general rush of citizens and
allies to join this splendid expedition,
and absolute [music] confidence in the
result.
And many were eager to have their names
on the enrollment.
Such was the speed of this advance that
the declaration of war and the war
itself reached Carthage at the same
time.
The timing was devastating.
The Punic power had just lost an army to
Massinissa. [music] They had no fleet,
they had no mercenaries, they had no
allies, and they had no supplies.
They were in no state to remotely
challenge Rome, as had once occurred in
the first and second Punic Wars of their
forefathers.
Once more, Carthage pled for peace by
any means.
The Senate responded that [music] this
might be considered if they first sent
300 children from the noble families to
be kept as hostages.
Despite any suspicions they might harbor
of betrayal, the Carthaginians
nonetheless submitted.
Appian paints a heart-wrenching scene.
Quote,
"They sent their children into Sicily
amid the tears of the parents, the
kindred, and especially the mothers, who
clung to their little ones with frantic
cries and seized hold of the ships and
of the officers who were taking them
away, even holding the anchors and
tearing the ropes and throwing their
arms around the sailors in order to
prevent the ships from moving.
Some of them even swam out far into the
sea beside the ships, shedding tears and
gazing at their children.
Some of them tore out their hair on the
shore and smoked their breasts in the
extremity of their grief.
It seemed to them that they were giving
hostages only nominally,
but were really giving up the city
when they surrendered their children
without any fixed conditions.
Many of them predicted with lamentations
>> [music]
>> that it would profit the city nothing to
have delivered up their children.
Such were the scenes that took place in
Carthage when the hostages were sent
away.
Upon receiving this group, the consuls
gave word that further instructions
[music] would soon come.
Meanwhile, however, they sent secret
messages to their troops to press the
assault.
And so, for the first time in over 50
years, a Roman army landed in Africa.
Its purpose was clear.
Carthage must be destroyed.
The arrival of Roman [music] troops sent
shockwaves across the city of Carthage.
The people began to panic.
Soon, delegations were sent to plead
with [music] the invaders for mercy.
Appian brings to life the chilling
reception they received. Quote,
"When the ambassadors came, the consuls
placed themselves on a high seat with
the chief [music] officers and military
tribunes standing near.
And the whole army drawn up on either
side with arms glistening and standards
[music] erect.
When the consuls had proclaimed silence
by the trumpet, a herald told the
Carthaginian envoys to come forward, and
they advanced through the long camp, but
they did not draw near to the place
[music] where the consuls sat
because they were fenced off by a rope.
We are told of how the ambassadors
[music] begged the Romans for peace,
stating that they had no allies, no
mercenaries, no armies, and no
elephants.
But the cold reply came.
Quote,
"If you are sincerely desirous of peace,
why do you need any arms?
Bring all your weapons and engines of
war, both public and private, and
deliver them to us."
The Carthaginians complied.
As commanded, they immediately loaded a
vast wagon convoy of materials.
It included 2,000 [music]
catapults,
200,000 armor sets,
innumerable javelins, and countless
arrows. [music]
Such was the remarkable nature of this
spectacle that even the Romans were
impressed.
And yet, they were not moved. Once more,
a new set of demands was laid upon the
Carthaginians.
They must abandon their city, whose
existence might [music] entice them to
return to their old ways of war,
and make a new home in the interiors of
Africa,
>> [music]
>> at least 10 mi away from any shoreline.
At this,
the Punic ambassadors were stunned into
silence.
Such was the inflammatory nature of the
demand that they [music] feared bringing
such words back to the city, lest their
own people turn on them.
But Rome would [music] not yield.
They merely ordered the lictors to throw
[music] out the envoys from camp and
sent a detachment of the fleet to shadow
them home.
The message was clear.
Surrender
or die.
With the dawning of the Third Punic War
in 149 BC, the doom of Carthage was at
hand.
To all looking on, its fate seemed
clear.
If the Carthaginians could not beat the
Romans as masters of a mighty empire,
what hope did they have now as mere
rulers of but a single city?
And yet, it still commanded one of the
mightiest capitals of the ancient world,
boasting over 30 km of circuit walls,
triple-layered defenses, fortified
harbors, and a dense urban acropolis,
there was much for any would-be invader
to overcome.
That is without even mentioning its
300,000 strong population, which stood
ready to defend their homes in the event
of an existential crisis.
And so, wounded [music] as this lion of
Africa was,
it still had fights left in it.
This would be a painful lesson for the
wolf of Rome
in what would prove to be one of the
longest sieges in its history.
Today, let us witness the first wave of
attacks in the epic siege of Carthage.
The Third Punic War had been declared in
149 BC in the most lopsided of fashions.
Carthage, diminished, disarmed, and
defanged by the stipulations of the
prior war, had little interest in
drawing the ire of Rome.
Thus, in the interbellum [music] years,
it had focused on domestic matters while
shrugging off decades of torment and
insults from its neighbors.
Yet, [music] at every turn, Rome had
acted in bad faith.
From turning a blind eye to the
Numidians as they chipped away at Punic
territory to using Carthaginian
self-defense as casus belli and
rebuffing all attempts at de-escalation.
So desperate were the Carthaginians for
peace that they had surrendered their
leaders,
their children, and even their entire
armory as appeasement.
But this was not enough for Rome, who
next demanded [music] that they abandon
their city entirely.
With such ludicrous terms, the Punic
ambassadors returned home with the
heaviest of hearts.
Back in Carthage, panic had reached a
fever pitch. This crescendoed with the
arrival of the envoys and the sight of
enemy sails on the horizon.
The Council of 104 summarily rejected
Rome's demands as a shamelessly brazen
overreach.
The city may no longer have been a
superpower, but neither was it a meek
slave.
There would be no surrender.
What followed was a scene of
indescribable madness.
All who had previously argued for
appeasement were lynched, stoned, or
torn to pieces while mobs went
door-to-door hunting down any Italians
who could be sacrificed as just
recompense for the rapaciousness of
their leaders.
Meanwhile, the city was full of wailing
and wrath, of fear and furore.
People took refuge in the temples,
invoking the gods who had abandoned
them.
All ran to the empty dockyards, the
stables, and the armories to curse those
who had robbed them of the means to now
defend themselves. [music]
But a few kept their wits about them.
These went to the gates and bolted shut
the great doors of Carthage.
The city would go down fighting.
To this end, Appian reports the populace
was seized by grim determination.
Quote,
"All minds were filled with courage from
this transformation. All the sacred
places, the temples, [music] and every
other unoccupied space were turned into
workshops where men and women worked
together day and night without pause,
taking their food by turns on a fixed
schedule.
Each day they made 100 shields, 300
swords, 1,000 missiles for catapults,
500 darts and javelins, and as many
catapults as they could.
For strings to bend them, the women cut
off their hair for want of other
fibers."
For the provision of the army, the
citizen body was raised to take up arms,
as were the slaves who had been granted
[music] their freedom by decree of the
Senate.
For generals, they chose two men by the
name of Hasdrubal.
One to command the defenses
and the other to maintain control of the
30,000 strong army which had been raised
in the field.
Against them came the Romans, whom
Appian claims numbered 80,000 foot and
4,000 horse supported by a fleet of 50
quinqueremes
>> [music]
>> and 100 galleys.
While modern scholars tend to cast doubt
on the size of this force, it was
nonetheless a massive one, the likes of
which had not been seen for many years.
As the combined Roman fleet and army
approached, it will now be worth
reviewing the targets of their campaign.
The city of Carthage lay at the tip of a
promontory jutting out into the [music]
Bay of Tunis.
This, in and of itself, offered great
geographic protection.
Man-made features further enhanced the
position.
Chief among them was a 32-km long set of
circuit walls which fully enclosed the
urban center and its neighboring
agricultural district, the Megara.
Most formidable still was the
triple-layered portion of the walls
which ran along the 5-km wide neck of
[music] the peninsula.
Featuring a series of palisades and
ditches, it culminated in a massive 9-m
thick and 20-m tall wall studded with
towers and honeycombed by barracks and
[music] stables.
To the south, a small section of the
outer wall connected the landward
defenses to the fortified ports known as
the Cothon.
First came the outer merchant harbor and
further within the military harbor. The
latter of these was most impressive. Its
round shipyards had enough capacity to
house over 200 vessels.
At its heart was a central island
bearing the admiral's quarters.
These were elevated so as to survey the
entire area.
Access to the harbors meanwhile was
controlled by a series of tower-studded
walls and a great chain which could be
raised in emergencies.
Altogether, this was to be among the
most heavily fortified cities ever to
find itself in the crosshairs of a Roman
siege.
Before such a mighty capital, even the
Romans must have been awed. Yet, the
consuls believed that by pressing an
immediate assault, they might
precipitate a swift surrender or at the
very least catch its defenders
unprepared.
Thus, plans were drafted for a
two-pronged assault.
The consul Manilius would attack
directly from the isthmus while his
colleague Insuranus attacked from the
south flank.
The first of these assaults saw the main
body of Roman troops erect a camp along
the plains.
Here, they hastily prepared ladders,
rams, ditch-filling materials, and other
equipment.
With these, the eager manipoles of heavy
infantry charged the enemy.
Details are sparse, but it seems that
they managed to begin fording the
outermost trench and surmounting its low
parapet.
However, whatever hopes of quick victory
may have energized their charge were
quickly dashed.
The Carthaginians answered with a
hellish retort.
Arrows, slings, bolts, and catapult
stones, which had been crafted in the
[music] feverish preparations of the
past days, now rained down upon the
Roman lines to deadly effect. To make
matters worse, any troops who managed to
brave the maelstrom were swept off the
fortifications by swift counterattacks.
These were not the browbeaten
Carthaginians of just a few weeks prior.
In the face of such a vigorous defense,
the assault drew back.
Meanwhile, the forces of Consul
Censorinus hopes to capitalize on the
distraction by bringing to bear ladders
by land and sea against the more weakly
built walls to the south.
Yet here too, they were met with
unexpectedly stiff resistance.
Troops approaching on the ground were
turned into pin cushions as they
disembarked to charge up the narrow
tongue of land which offered no cover or
room to maneuver.
The situation was worse for the sitting
duck legionaries forced to make their
approach aboard crowded warships.
Here their confined decks made easy
killing fields for the Punic troops
directly overhead.
Appian mentions that some of these
vessels had been equipped with ladders
mounted to their prows with assault
teams at the ready. But, as had occurred
on land, all attempts to ascend these
rickety contraptions only resulted in
the doom of those foolhardy enough to
try.
But, the consuls were far from giving
up. Bullheaded as they were, it seems a
second assault was ordered shortly after
the first.
Whether probing for perceived weak
points or hoping to catch an enemy low
on ammunition, they found neither.
Carthage stood just as strong.
Thus, the Romans were cast back,
bloodied and bruised, a second time.
And so, in those first days of the siege
of Carthage, the Punic lion roared and
the wolf of Rome was humbled.
Dazed by this turn of events, the two
consuls now took a moment to regroup.
This involved setting up camp along the
isthmus
and stationing ships around the harbor
entrance to more properly begin
tightening the noose around their foe.
Yet, the situation was complicated by
the 30,000-strong
Punic [music] army, which lay at the
rear.
While not mighty enough to take on the
consular army directly,
it could certainly undermine it.
This included cutting off potential
land-based supply lines and harassing
foragers.
For instance, when the consul Censorinus
sent troops to collect wood [music] for
the construction of fresh siege works,
the enemy was quickly upon them.
Under the command of a certain Himilco,
cavalry squadrons proved brutally
effective,
killing over 500 troops and seizing
important materials in just one notable
raid.
Despite such losses, the consuls [music]
were nonetheless able to collect the
requisite material to mount a third wave
of attacks.
These came once more against the two
positions.
Against the triple walls, the legions
made some advances.
Portions of the outer ditch were now
firmly filled, and their crossing
protected by makeshift shield
emplacements.
This allowed troops to begin tearing
down the next layer of defensive works.
But the going was tough and subject to
relentless pressure from the
Carthaginians.
After several more bloody days of
effort, the consul Manilius is said to
have despaired of ever taking the city
by this side.
Thus, the Romans would seek another way.
Efforts were now directed against the
southern wall.
It was here that Censorinus had slowly
been filling in the shallow lake,
widening the approach available to the
legions.
Beyond bowshot, his troops had also
completed the construction of a pair of
monstrous rams.
One was to be hauled into place by 6,000
foot troops, while the other was to be
driven by an equivalent number of
sailors.
Such a division of labors was likely
intended as a means to boost morale by
having either side compete for the glory
of first breaching the enemy's wall.
In the weeks that followed, the great
engines were slowly brought to bear.
Climbing mounds of earth, the rams'
heads aimed high. Then, shift after
shift, crews hammered away at the
stonework.
During this process, we must imagine the
withering exchange of missiles as both
attacker and defender attempted to
suppress the other.
Eventually, the legions managed to erode
a portion of the walls.
As it fell away, they caught a glimpse
of the city inside.
Their prize was in sight.
But the Punic commander had his own
counter plays in mind.
That evening, he applied determined
pressure to regain control of the
damaged portion of the walls.
The fighting was fierce, but Rome's grip
was eventually pried loose.
Next, he dispatched work crews to
initiate urgent repairs. These toiled
all night to buy them more time. Sorties
were launched beyond the walls.
Carthaginians now plunged into the Roman
siege lines bearing torches.
While they failed to entirely destroy
the ramps, enough damage was inflicted
to render them useless.
Nonetheless, the Roman commanders were
eager to regain the advantage.
Once more, troops were massed before the
damaged section of the wall and poured
into the breach.
On the opposite side lay a patch of open
ground where ranks [music] of
Carthaginians had massed.
Behind the armed men were swarms of
regular citizens with nothing more than
stones, clubs, and improvised weapons.
While above them, atop the nearby
rooftops, were more individuals ready to
offer ranged and morale support.
Such was the hornets' nest that had been
stirred by the intrusion of the legions.
Appian reports that as the Roman units
squeezed through the opening to make a
pass at the defenders, they were
brutally hit from all sides.
Rank after rank was mauled in this way.
Only Scipio Aemilianus, then a military
tribune, had the quick thinking to
properly divide and rein [music] in his
units.
Thus were they able to properly secure
the breach,
ensuring the beachhead remained open and
preventing the utter destruction of
allied units during their retreats.
Only such valiant efforts brought a
silver lining to an otherwise grim and
fruitless day of attacks.
Further events undercut the Roman siege.
First came sickness. It broke out in the
camp of Censorinus on account of the
stagnant waters in the nearby lake.
As this malady took hold, the situation
was improved by relocating the camp near
the sea.
However, this now brought them in reach
of a Carthaginian ploy.
Sensing an opportunity, the defenders
secretly launched a fleet of small
rafts.
These were set alight and swiftly
carried by westerly winds directly
[music]
onto the new Roman position.
In the conflagration which followed,
much of the invading fleet was
destroyed.
To make matters worse, Censorinus
returned to Rome [music] for elections
leaving behind his consul Manilius who
lacked much military [music] experience.
Thus undermined, the Carthaginians were
emboldened to attack them.
This manifested one night as a massive
sally against the legionary camp.
Punic forces rushed across the ditches
and began tearing down the palisades.
Now was a chance to right the wrongs and
drive the invaders back.
If the foe could be wounded here, then
perhaps Hasdrubal and the field army
could close in for the kill.
Unfortunately, such dreams would be
dashed.
Once more in this hour of chaos, it was
Scipio who saved the Romans by riding
out with the cavalry to throw back the
assailants.
Even still, this had been a close run
affair.
In the aftermath, Scipio Aemilianus was
shaken by the threat to his life.
He now fell back from the enemy walls to
establish a more heavily fortified camp
in the middle of the peninsula.
It was anchored along the sea by an
additional fort meant to secure landing
for the supply ships of vital to his
continued campaign.
Such moves betrayed the reality of the
situation that was settling in.
This would not be a short siege.
But few at the time could have predicted
that it would drag on for another three
grueling years.
When Rome decided to launch the Third
Punic War,
it had done so with the expectation that
destroying Carthage would be easy.
Yet, nothing could be further from the
truth.
Despite the African city dismantling its
whole fleet [music] and yielding its
entire arsenal before the fighting had
even started, the defenders fought like
lions.
Time and again, determined Roman
assaults were thrown back with brutal
[music] casualties.
However, amidst these [music] disasters,
one man distinguished himself in both
honor and bravery.
Whether that meant suicidally charging
into the fray to save abandoned troops
or judiciously holding the line to cover
their retreat,
his name was the first on the lips of
every [music] soldier when asked who
alone could lead them to victory.
This is the rise of Scipio Aemilianus
and the siege of Carthage.
The year is 148 BC, roughly 12 months
since the start of the siege.
Having had difficulty in taking Carthage
directly, the Romans now seek to
entirely cut off its support from the
rest of Africa.
This begins with a ravaging of the
countryside as both punishment and a
means of collecting supplies.
In such affairs, the legions were
shadowed by African cavalry under the
command of Phameas.
These he led from secret bases to ambush
and strike at the foragers [music] to
deadly effect.
It was said that only the tribune Scipio
Aemilianus proved resilient to the raids
on account of his prudent scouting and
well-disciplined operations.
Such traits were viewed by the Romans as
naturally befitting of his familial
pedigree. After all, he was the son of
Lucius Aemilius Paullus,
victor of the Third Macedonian War and
adoptive grandson of Scipio Africanus,
vanquisher of Hannibal in the Second
Punic War.
From the clay of this lineage, Scipio
Aemilianus had molded his own budding
[music] career.
First as a participant in the Macedonian
War, then as a tribune in the Numantine
War, where he reportedly won both the
mural crown and the spolia opima.
Thus decorated, he had pulled the
necessary strings to be assigned to the
army now in Africa. His exploits would
only continue to mount.
For now, this meant doing what he could
whilst under the authority of Consul
Manilius.
Therefore, when the legions had
concluded their ravaging of the
countryside, Scipio returned with them
to the main camp on the Isthmus.
In retaliation for these depredations,
the Carthaginians launched a surprise
night attack on the sea fort which
housed important supplies.
Apparently, a great number of citizens
joined in on the effort, making much
noise so as to increase the impression
of a large host coming forth.
This succeeded in panicking Consul
Manilius, who kept his men in camp.
Only Tribune Scipio took the initiative.
Riding out with 10 turmae of horse, he
too played the act of a larger force
by having the squadrons fan out with
torches and make feints all across the
front.
Thus was the enemy's momentum halted and
its own ranks thrown into chaos.
By daybreak, the Carthaginians had
retreated back to the city.
The Consul Manilius next chose to return
to operations [music]
in the interiors of Africa. To this end,
he planned to confront the field army of
Hasdrubal, presently located in
Nepheris.
However, the road there was winding and
flanked by rough terrain which might
hide any number of dangers.
Scipio protested but was overridden by
the other tribunes.
Thus, they pressed on.
Eventually, the legions crossed a river,
stumbling upon the Carthaginians nearby.
A terrible battle ensued which saw many
die on both sides, but none emerged the
clear victor.
Towards the end of the day, Hasdrubal
pulled back to the local heights while
Manilius attempted to double back across
the river.
However, the fording proved difficult.
Hasdrubal seized on the opportunity to
swoop down upon them.
Here, he slew vast numbers of Romans,
including several of their tribunes.
But, once more, in this hour of need,
Scipio rode out with the cavalry to
confront the foe.
With but 300 horse, he managed to
distract [music]
the enemy long enough to allow their
comrades to complete the crossing.
And yet, in the process, some 2,000
legionnaires had been left across the
far bank, where they were in the midst
of being encircled.
The main army hesitated, considering
whether it was worth risking the whole
for the sake of the few. But, for
Scipio, the choice was easy.
He immediately set off with the cavalry
to rescue them, or die trying.
Riding hard, this relief force arrived
just as the final assault was to take
place.
Without skipping a beat, Scipio assessed
the situation and deftly led the cavalry
to a hill behind the attackers,
threatening to flank [music] them should
any move be taken.
At this sudden turn of events, the enemy
fled, and the besieged Romans were led
back to safety before a pursuit could be
mounted.
For this, Scipio was hailed as the hero
of the legions.
Adding further to his reputation was the
respect he commanded among the army,
allowing him [music] to negotiate the
proper burial of the fallen who were
left behind.
When all returned to camp, Scipio's
deeds stood as a small silver lining in
an otherwise disappointing campaign.
This caught the attention of
investigators sent by the Senate to
understand the nature of the stagnating
situation.
As a result, they tasked him with
reaching out to Massinissa and the
Numidians for support.
Unfortunately, the old king would soon
die, leaving Scipio to assist in sorting
out the situation of his heirs.
From this came an agreement to have the
prince Gulussa join the Romans with his
troops.
These, in turn, were used to root out
Phameas from the hiding places he had
been using to harass the Romans.
As a final masterstroke, Scipio then
persuaded this most formidable enemy to
not just surrender, but to actually
switch sides.
Thus, did the year end with a
significant shift in the balance of
power towards the Romans, all on account
of the tribune's hard work.
With the coming of winter, the armies
now stood down.
Scipio actually returned to Italy, with
many wishing he might one day return as
consul to be the one who finally
concluded the siege of Carthage.
For now, however, it would be the newly
elected consul Calpurnius Piso and his
legatus Lucius Mancinus who sailed to
Africa to assume command of that theater
of operations.
That spring, they would kick off the
campaign season by striking out at the
towns surrounding Carthage.
On top of the list was Aspis.
An assault was made by land and sea, but
these were foiled.
Out of apparent frustration, the consul
Piso sacked another nearby town despite
its inhabitants believing they were
protected by a prior [music] treaty.
After this, an attack was made on Hippo
Acra, which had been preying on Roman
supply ships. Yet, it too proved
stubborn in resistance.
With Punic help, the inhabitants even
managed to destroy the Roman siege
equipment.
Thus, the consul was forced to end the
year's affairs with another failure.
Such disappointments were beginning to
mount.
Making matters worse, they emboldened
the Carthaginians,
who not only made overtures to the other
powers of Africa for help, but also
reached out to Rome's enemies abroad,
such as Perseus of Macedon.
For now, many sat on the sidelines,
waiting to see which way the winds were
blowing.
If things didn't improve for Rome, the
situation could quickly get out of hand.
A new leader was needed to decisively
change the narrative.
Back in Rome, the people had but one
name on their lips for who might next
take command of the war,
Scipio Aemilianus.
However, there was a small complication.
The man was still too young to legally
be elected [music] to the position of
consul, running instead for that of
aedile in the elections of 148 BC.
Matters came to a head as Rome's
politicians [music] rebuffed the
people's will on account of its
illegality.
In response, a tribune of the people
threatened [music] to revoke the right
of the consuls to even hold an election
at all.
Finally, the impasse was broken [music]
when a special age exception was made
for this year's appointments. Thus, it
was that Scipio received the
unprecedented honor of being elected
consul at the age of 36.
His appointment to [music] command of
the legions in Africa came shortly
thereafter.
But not all [music] were keen to pass
the torch to this upstart.
Mancinus, who yet still held command as
legatus, made a final gamble to seize
the city of Carthage himself.
The plan was to target a portion of the
wall which had so far been neglected on
account of it being protected by
seemingly impassable cliffs.
One day when the omens proved favorable,
Mancinus swiftly moved in with a small
assault force. These scrambled up the
cliff, planted their ladders, and began
the ascent. A nearby Carthaginian
garrison spotted them just in time.
These sallied out to the nearest gate
and rushed to disrupt the cliffside
operation.
A scuffle ensued.
When the defenders then attempted to
pull back, the Romans followed in hot
pursuit. In the chaos, they actually
managed to slip through the gatehouse.
All of a sudden, the legions were inside
the city.
Mancinus, who had been monitoring
affairs from nearby ships, was just as
shocked as the Carthaginians.
Without wasting a moment, he ordered an
immediate disembarkment.
Troops and sailors, half-armed and
armored, now followed the commander in a
mad dash for the gates.
One can only imagine the exhilaration of
Mancinus as he effortlessly passed
through the threshold of fortifications
that for years had bedeviled the
legions.
Many thanks were especially owed to the
gods for granting him this opportunity
where so many before had been [music]
denied.
But first, this toehold in the city had
to be secured.
One option would be to press the
advantage.
However, with night approaching, it
would be unwise to rush out into the
unknowns of the dark.
On the other hand, to wait the coming of
dawn meant also awaiting an inevitable
counterattack [music] by the defenders.
Mancinus opted for the latter.
Occupying a strong position near the
walls, he dug in for the night whilst
sending urgent messages to Consul Piso
to bring men and supplies with all
haste.
Just as the messengers for relief
[music] reached Utica, newly appointed
Consul Scipio arrived by boat.
Around midnight, he became appraised of
the situation and immediately jumped
into action.
First, he sent out the cavalry to join
Consul Piso in a quick march on the
city.
Second, he ordered his newly arrived
fleet to sail out at once for support.
And third, he released the Punic
ambassadors with a message to bring back
to Carthage.
Tell them Scipio is coming.
At dawn,
Mancinus found that the sun's first rays
revealed a vast mob from Carthage
bearing down on his position.
Though he had 3,500 men under his
banner, scarcely 500 of these were
armed.
The latter of these he formed into a
defensive circle to protect the former.
With barely a moment to spare, the
Carthaginians were upon them.
These assailed them from all sides with
swords, spears, clubs, javelins, and
arrows.
The attacks grew fiercer with each part
of the circle that was whittled away.
Soon enough, the casualties would be so
high that the perimeter would collapse.
Desperately, Mancinus ordered his men to
pull back towards the wall. Here, they
would attempt to make a stand, but time
was not on their side. Soon, the enemy's
pressure was so great that the Romans
were pushed back to the very precipice
of the cliffs.
But just as it seemed the survivors
would be dashed upon the rocks, Appian
reports, quote,
"Scipio's fleet came in sight, driven at
a tremendous rate of speed, with
soldiers crowding the decks everywhere.
Gradually, the Carthaginians drew back,
and Scipio received those who had been
in peril into his ships."
Once more, a chance to seize Carthage
had failed.
But at the same time, a chance to save
Roman lives had succeeded,
>> [music]
>> thanks to the quick work of Scipio. Next
time, however, he would ensure that
there would be no disaster [music]
in need of saving.
Upon taking full control of the army in
Africa,
Scipio recognized that to [music]
conquer Carthage, he first had to
conquer the legions.
Over the two years of campaigning,
[music] these had fallen into a sorry
state, lacking in discipline and poorly
supplied.
They had fallen to idleness, avarice,
and banditry.
Worse yet were the camp followers, who
swelled with hucksters and leeches
[music] of all kind.
Scipio began by first calling up the
[music] camp for a speech,
stating, quote, "The enemy, from the
hopeless weakness in which I left him,
has risen to such strength, and your
labor has been made harder by your
laziness.
If I considered you to blame for this, I
should punish you now.
But since I ascribe it to another,
I shall overlook the past.
Follow the example of my habits and my
industry.
We must toil while the danger lasts.
Spoils and luxury must be postponed to
their proper time.
This I command, and this the law
commands.
Those who obey shall reap large rewards.
Those who do not will repent it.
And with that, [music] he dismissed the
troops whilst ordering that the camp be
entirely purged of all non-soldiers.
Only those bearing necessary foodstuffs
may return.
All exceptions were subject to Scipio's
final approval. [music]
In the days which followed, the men were
thus renewed in spirit and [music]
focused in purpose.
This was likely further honed by drills
and exercises. [music]
But such practice did not last long.
Soon their metal would be put to the
test against [music] the walls of
Carthage once more.
This would be Scipio's first true trial
of command.
The siege of Carthage had dragged on for
two long interminable years.
Yet now, as Scipio Aemilianus took
command, he would bring matters to new
heights of expediency and intensity.
This would involve bold plans to bring
down the mighty capital.
They included
a night assault upon the breadbasket of
its agricultural suburb,
the raising of siege lines to choke off
the city by land,
and the construction of a gargantuan
mole to seal the city by sea.
But against such schemes, the
Carthaginians would not sit idle. From
their desperation came brave
counterattacks and shrewd counterfoils,
which bedeviled the Romans at every
turn.
At stake was nothing less than the very
survival of their civilization.
Now, let us bear witness to this most
dire contest of wills.
This is Scipio's trial by fire in the
siege of Carthage.
Scipio Aemilianus was eager to make a
name for himself as the man who finally
tamed Carthage.
Thus, as a newly elected [music] consul
with but one year's imperium, he set out
a bold plan to take the city.
Where others had [music] tried and
failed on multiple attempts, he would
succeed by targeting the Megara district
with a dual-pronged [music] night
assault.
The operation began just after the sun
had set.
In the dark, huddled masses wrapped
themselves for warmth and for
concealment as officers conferred with
their guides on the routes to be taken.
Scipio's first division sets off on a
sweeping maneuver meant to begin
wrapping around the suburbs opposite
side.
Shortly after these had departed, a
second division advanced directly
against the main walls.
Armed with axes, ladders, and crowbars,
these assault forces crossed the roughly
3 km to the enemy position.
For a time, they remained obscured by
the night. Inevitably, however, the
watchmen upon the walls spotted them,
raising an alarm.
Yet, this was anticipated [music] by
Scipio, who had a clever ploy at the
ready.
In response to the enemy shouts, he had
his own troops directly ahead of them
respond with their own cries. This
confirmed to the foe that an assault was
indeed underway.
Next, however, came a second chorus of
shouts raised by the troops which had
been flanking the position.
The effect of their positioning was such
that it sounded as though the Romans
were attacking from both sides.
The enemy was inside the walls.
Understandably, this unleashed terror
upon the defenders. Panicked
Carthaginians scattered into the night
attempting to raise the alarm and rally
at the next line of fortifications.
Phase one was accomplished.
Now, the legions attempted to actually
breach the walls.
However, this proved difficult [music]
in the dark. Despite trying his utmost
to scale the fortifications, phase two
was failing.
Thankfully, a deserted tower was spotted
near the position.
Without skipping a beat, Scipio ordered
the bravest of his men to seize the
building and raise a makeshift bridge
from its roof to the walls.
As they did so, defenders began to rally
challenging the construction with their
weapons.
The Romans responded in kind with
volleys of javelins.
Eventually, the task was achieved and
the first troops now rushed over the
chasm of night onto the enemy [music]
battlements.
This squad quickly cleared the wall,
rushed down [music] the stairs, and
opened a nearby gate.
4,000 Romans poured in.
These fanned out to seize control of the
foothold.
Many bewildered [music] Carthaginians
were captured while the panic was such
that the rest abandoned the outer
fortifications making for the inner
Byrsa Hill Acropolis.
It was a triumphant breakthrough.
However, the same darkness which had
granted [music] the Romans victory now
threatened to undo them.
Appian reports,
As the Megara was planted [music] with
gardens and was full of fruit-bearing
trees divided off by low walls, hedges,
and brambles, besides deep ditches full
of water running in every direction,
Scipio was fearful [music] lest it
should be impracticable and dangerous
for the army to pursue the enemy through
roads that they were unacquainted with
and lest they might fall into an ambush
in the night.
Accordingly, he withdrew.
Such restraint [music]
was the mark of a true commander who
knew the dangers of war.
And so, the tide of the Roman assault
receded just as quickly as it had come.
The Carthaginians [music] were
bewildered by this turn of events. As
morning came and revealed the immediate
danger had passed, their fear now turned
to anger.
Hasdrubal, in particular, wished to
exact some retribution for the attack
and raise the morale of his troops.
Thus, Appian remarks,
He took the Roman prisoners whom he
held, brought them up on the walls in
full sight of their comrades, and tore
out their eyes, tongues, and tendons
with iron hooks.
Of some, he lacerated the soles of the
feet. He cut off the fingers of others,
and some he [music] flayed alive.
All who survived these tortures he
hurled from the top of the walls.
He thus gave the Carthaginians to
understand that there was no possibility
of peace with the Romans and sought to
fire them with the [music] conviction
that their only safety was in fighting.
Apparently, this hardline move drove a
rift in the Punic ranks.
Some yet held out hope that a deal might
be struck and some form of amnesty
received.
Hasdrubal's barbaric display dashed
those plans and so members of the Senate
denounced him.
In response, he had them arrested and
[music] killed.
Thus, did the city's protector become
its tyrant.
Carthage would go down fighting whether
it wanted to or not.
Such affairs suited Scipio.
He now torched the enemy's [music]
abandoned outer camp and set about
sealing in the tomb of Carthage.
This involved the construction of a
massive siege line across the 4 and 1/2
km wide isthmus.
For 20 days, the legions toiled cutting
trees, digging ditches,
>> [music]
>> erecting towers, building walls, and
laying out entrapments.
The end result was a formidable feat of
military engineering.
It consisted of two major trench lines,
one which faced Carthage and the other
the mainland.
The interior space was then bisected by
two perpendicular trenches.
Along each of these was raised a
palisade along with rows of spiked
barricades.
The side facing Carthage was further
reinforced by a wall 3 m tall and 1 m
thick.
Studded along its almost 5-km [music]
length were parapets and towers.
At the very center of the line, Scipio
ordered the construction of an
observation post.
Here, the engineers first built a sturdy
tower of earth and stone roughly 6 m
tall. On top of this, they raised a
second wooden tower reaching up an
additional 12 m.
From such heights, one could survey not
just the countryside for miles around,
but also peer into the heart of
Carthage.
It was a building of great strategic
significance to the Romans, but also a
looming monument of doom for the trapped
Carthaginians.
The completion of the siege works had an
immediate impact on Punic logistics.
No longer could they send out foragers
into the countryside or receive overland
convoys of goods.
Now, it was exclusively by sea that the
city was fed. For a population of at
least a half a million souls, the
demands were intense. Some relief could
be gained from fishermen and
merchantmen. Rome's naval blockade,
after all, was imperfect on account of
the dangerous [music] reefs and their
ability to anchor too close to the walls
of the city.
Thus, when the wind blew just right,
Carthaginian ships could run the Roman
gauntlet.
But, such opportunities were rare, and
what meager supplies trickled through
Hasdrubal claimed for his 30,000
soldiers.
The people of Carthage were left to fend
for themselves.
No doubt this meant [music] scouring the
city and the Megara for anything edible.
But, with hundreds of thousands [music]
desperately toiling in this manner for
months on end at this point, the
environment was picked clean.
Starvation now set in.
Perceiving this from the observation
tower, Scipio decided to turn up the
pressure. Why wait for the city to
slowly starve when elections were around
the corner and another might swoop in to
claim his prize.
Carthage must now also be choked off by
sea.
To this end, he planned to build out a
grand mole of stone that would seal
Carthage's harbor.
Work began along the southern tongue of
land, which had previously seen direct
Roman assaults fail. While no attacks
were planned, the area was nonetheless
reinforced with cover for the laborers.
Thus protected, they began staging
materials and laying the 32-m [music]
wide foundations for a seawall whose
sloping base would eventually support an
8-m wide top.
This was to be another Herculean task.
Looking on, the Carthaginians derided
the effort.
Construction would take months to show
any progress, and many boasted that its
execution was impossible in the face of
the winds and tides.
However, their grins quickly evaporated
as the entire Roman army and fleet
feverishly descended upon the once
peaceful area, transforming its
appearance into that of a disturbed
anthill.
Without end, they toiled. Day and night,
the [music] stones were laid, and the
very land now rose to entomb the Punic
harbor.
Seeing this, the Carthaginians devised
their own plans.
Appian writes, quote,
"They began to excavate another entrance
at another part of the harbor in
mid-sea, where it was impossible to
carry an embankment on account of the
depth of the water and the fury of the
wind. Even the women and children helped
to dig. They began the work inside, and
carefully concealed what they were
doing.
At the same time, they built triremes
and quinqueremes from old material, and
they left nothing to be desired in the
way of courage and high spirit.
Moreover, they concealed [music]
everything so perfectly that not even
the prisoners could tell Scipio with
certainty what was going on,
but merely that there was a great racket
in the harbor day and night.
Undeterred, the Romans pressed on with
their construction.
When the moment was right, Carthage
sprung its trap.
At dawn, the last portion of the harbor
wall was torn down. All of a sudden,
from its mole poured a new fleet of 50
triremes and numerous other small
vessels which had been cobbled together.
These now flowed out to the open [music]
sea in full view of the Romans.
The effect was dazzling and totally
unexpected.
Our sources claim that in that very
moment, had Carthage plunged upon the
attackers' position, it would have been
routed and the entire enemy fleet
captured.
Such a feat would, in turn, have
shattered the blockade, opening up
Carthage to relief [music] and allowing
its armies to flip the script on the
legions now trapped on land.
Unfortunately, this grand entrance
[music]
was merely meant as a show of force.
Behind the scenes, we must imagine that
the fleet was in reality far from being
ready to actually fight. After all, its
ships had never been tested in the open
water, and the crews needed time to
actually learn to operate together as a
battle group.
After posturing and [music] practicing
in the seas, the Punic ships returned to
their new harbor.
Yet, this was not the end of their
scheme.
Three days later, the makeshift fleet
put to sail,
this time fully loaded for battle.
The Punic triremes arranged themselves
in a line along the shores of their city
with the smaller ships swarming around
them as supports and reserves.
It was apparent they wanted a fight.
The Romans obliged them.
Legions abandoned their works and now
loaded onto the Roman fleet.
It's unclear how many ships were
deployed for the showdown. Earlier
reports put the invaders fleets at 50
quinqueremes and 100 galleys at the
start of the war, but how much it had
degraded or been reinforced since then
is unknown.
Whatever the case, it seems that both
sides were at rough parity.
And so, they now rode into position
against one another, each hoping that
here, in the waves bearing the
reflection of Carthage, they would
decide the fate of the city.
Meanwhile, we must imagine that the
whole citizenry of the capital was
assembled atop its walls and its roofs
to witness this climactic showdown.
The year is 147 BC
and the great general Scipio Aemilianus
has been tasked with bringing about the
final destruction of Carthage.
Thus far, he has moved the pieces into
place, whipping the legions into shape,
building up formidable siege works, and
clamping down on the enemies' remaining
lifelines.
But Carthage fights like a cornered
animal.
It now prepares a wave of daring
midnight sorties to destroy all of the
foes' engines of war whilst unleashing a
secret fleet it has been assembling in
the darkness.
To succeed in this endeavor will be to
turn the tides on the invader.
But to fail risks sapping the last of
their resources [music]
in a race against starvation.
This is the last ray of hope in the
siege of Carthage.
After years of failed attempts to
directly assault the city of Carthage,
Rome had finally settled in to properly
besiege the capital of their arch-enemy.
Under the command of Scipio Aemilianus,
this had first begun with the
construction of a nearly 5-km long
double wall across the entire isthmus.
Carthage was decisively cut off by land.
Next, he turned to the sea, building a
gargantuan causeway of rocks to choke
off the harbor.
However, before it could be completed,
the Carthaginians burst through the
walls of their own port with a new fleet
they had been building in [music]
secret.
Now, both sides faced off for an
unexpected naval battle for the fate of
the city.
The fleets spent the early hours of the
day maneuvering into position.
Eventually, the time came.
Trumpets sounded, drums beat, and men
shouted.
With that, the rowers advanced. Momentum
slowly built as the warships closed
together.
With a great crash, the large vessels
rammed or grappled each other.
Their marines eager to close in for
boarding action.
Whilst these titanic quinqueremes and
triremes sparred,
a swarm of lesser ships moved in to
participate in the struggle.
According to Appian, quote,
"During the battle, the Carthaginian
small boats, running under the sides of
the Roman ships, which were taller,
stove holes in their sterns and broke
off their oars and rudders and damaged
them in various other ways, advancing
and retreating nimbly."
In this way did the struggle rage past
midday.
With each swing in the battle, cheers
went up from the Romans and
Carthaginians who watched from the
shores nearby.
But, the going was tough and the waters
soon clogged with bodies and timbers.
The participants were tired and
bloodied.
Yet,
>> [music]
>> even still, they persisted in this
grinding battle.
As evening approached, the victor was
still undecided.
Carthage decided [music] to begin
withdrawing rather than be caught out in
the open at night.
The goal would be to rest and recover
for a fight the next day.
However, as they attempted to pull back
through the makeshift exit [music] in
the harbor walls, their ships became
congested on account of their numbers.
Only the small vessels were able to
retire through the breach. The larger
warships, meanwhile, pulled into a wide
dock which had been built along the
outer seawall for the unloading of
merchant vessels.
As the Roman fleet gave chase, the Punic
ships arranged themselves [music]
with their rams facing outwards to
receive the assault. Meanwhile, their
crews dispersed across the decks and
surrounding parapets to offer supporting
fire.
The position was strong. Yet, at a
standstill, it meant that the Roman
ships were able to deliver brutal
charges.
However, the Carthaginians managed to
return the favor in the painfully long
amount of time it took the attackers to
row backwards.
This would be no easy task.
But Scipio was determined to dash the
fleet then and there before night could
rescue them.
At the current rate, this would mean the
equal obliteration of his own ships.
A heavy toll for victory.
Thankfully, answering this call came
from a group of five allied Greek ships.
These cleverly dashed at the
Carthaginians only after having tied
long ropes to weights and dropped
[clears throat] anchor.
The proper measurements had been made
such that they had just enough slack to
strike the enemy, at which point [music]
they could use the rope to quickly pull
themselves back to safety.
Observing the effectiveness of this
tactic, the rest of the Roman fleet
followed suit.
Great damage [music] was done in the
ensuing hours.
But the coming of night brought respite
to the Carthaginians
before they could be dealt a mortal
wound.
Under the cover of darkness, they now
retreated into the city.
The next day, Scipio determined that the
enemy's position at the docks must be
destroyed lest they use it to ever again
threaten his own fleet.
To this end, he now mobilized rams and
other siege engines to batter down its
defenses.
Against them stood the Carthaginians who
fought back from the surrounding
parapets.
Yet from a distance, they could only
slow the determined push which
eventually managed to bring down a
portion of the walls.
That night, however, the defenders
prepared a daring sortie.
Stripping naked, dozens of Carthaginians
plunged into the sea to sneak their way
up to the siege works.
Still undetected, the assailants then
lit their torches. In an instant, the
ploy was revealed and the alarms raised.
Appian writes, quote,
"Becoming visible and being naked, they
suffered greatly from wounds. Barbed
arrows and spear points rained [music]
on their breasts and faces.
Even still, they did not relax their
efforts, but rushed forward like wild
beasts against the blows
until they had set the engines on fire
and put the Romans to disorderly flight.
[music]
Panic and confusion spread through the
whole camp and such fear as was never
before known, caused by the [music]
frenzy of these naked enemies."
So great was the chaos that Scipio was
forced to rush out himself.
Atop a horse, he charged into the stream
of fleeing soldiers, ordering his
lieutenants to slay any who did not
rally.
In this desperate effort, even Scipio
was forced to cut down his own men.
Eventually, some order returned when the
Romans were able to rally in the nearby
camp.
Even still, they remained fearful of
what dangers may yet await them in the
dark and spent the entire night under
arms.
Such paranoia was to the advantage of
the Carthaginians who were able to now
complete the destruction of the siege
works and swim home.
At dawn, the Romans still found
themselves shocked by the events of the
prior night.
The defenders thus seized the
initiative, rebuilding the damaged
section of the wall and even reinforcing
it with new towers.
In the days which followed, Scipio was
finally able to rally his men and return
to the offensive.
New siege engines were built while tall
mounds of earth were raised against the
enemy position.
Together, these allowed the Romans to
look up and over the defensive wall.
From this vantage point, they threw
torches and pitched filled vessels upon
the towers.
A great conflagration was raised.
The flames destroyed the Punic towers,
driving the Carthaginians back.
Legionaries attempted to give chase, but
the area was reportedly so slippery with
blood that the pursuit was abandoned.
Even still, Scipio was determined to
claim his prize.
The entire dock was claimed and a wall
of bricks raised around it.
This he built to the same height as the
walls of the city.
4,000 men were stationed in the newly
erected [music] stronghold.
From their vantage point, these now
rained down javelins and darts upon the
enemy.
In this way, could the legions exert
further pressure on the defenders whilst
[music] keeping an eye out for any
future tricks they might be planning.
As fall turned [music] to winter, Scipio
was satisfied with the progress he had
made against the city itself and now
sought [music] other ways to undermine
Carthage.
Normally, the winter months were a time
for armies to power down.
However, Scipio was determined not to
waste a moment of his annual command.
Instead, he planned to sweep Punic power
entirely from the countryside.
To achieve this feat, he would have to
defeat the enemy's field army, some
50,000 strong, which lay encamped near
Neferis.
But, the Romans lacked the strength to
both besiege Carthage and this position
on their own.
Thus, the Numidians were called upon to
supply troops.
These allies came under Prince Gulussa,
bearing numerous skirmishers, cavalry,
and war elephants.
The assault upon [music] the enemy camp
began with these Numidians being used to
incessantly harass the Carthaginians.
Under this screen, the legions were able
to raise rudimentary siege works.
These then advanced [music] to tear two
holes in the enemy's perimeter palisade.
Now, Scipio prepared 3,000 of his heavy
infantry for a plunge [music] through
the breaches.
But, before the operation began, he
discreetly chose [music] 1,000 picked
men to sneak around to the opposite side
of the enemy's camp.
Once in position, he ordered the [music]
attack to the front.
The Roman assault was carried out in a
disciplined manner, with one division
after the other being lined up to take
their turn at the defenses.
In this way did they hammer away with
unyielding tenacity.
Like moths to a flame, the Carthaginian
defenders [music] rushed to defend
against the assault.
Just as anticipated.
Now,
>> [music]
>> the order was given to the ambush teams.
"Charge!" 1,000 picked troops rushed
upon the unprotected enemy rear.
Tearing down the palisades with axes or
scaling it with ropes, these poured over
the camp walls.
Seeing this, the Carthaginians panicked
thinking that a second army was upon
them.
Thus, the defenders fell into a route
abandoning the camp in all directions.
But the Numidians were there to catch
them.
Appian claims that in the aftermath,
some 70,000 of the enemies number,
including non-combatants, were
slaughtered.
From this defeat, about 4,000 of the
defenders escaped. These now sought
refuge in the nearby city of Nepheris.
But Scipio's wrath could not be averted.
The legions next descended upon these
fortifications, putting them to siege.
For 22 days, the Romans labored.
Apparently, they suffered greatly on
account of the winter conditions and the
bite of the defenders.
However, after nearly a month, Scipio
was able to claim the city as his own.
With this victory [music]
over the enemy army and an example made
of a great town, the rest of the African
communities were [music] humbled. All
either bent the knee or fell after a
quick struggle.
At long last, Carthage was now truly on
its own.
With such success under his belt,
Scipio's command of the African campaign
was extended for another year.
He, above all others, could be trusted
[music] to finish the job.
Spring of 146 BC had arrived.
With it came a thawing of the land
and a reawakening of the siege engines.
Scipio now pressed his assault upon
Carthage at two points, the Byrsa Hill
and the Cothon.
Against the former, the going was tough.
For years, the legions had struggled to
breach the enemies landward triple
defenses and despite penetrating the
Megara district on numerous occasions,
had achieved little more than purging
its outskirts of defenders.
Thus, as the Romans returned to the
action, here they were still faced with
the formidable obstacle of its intact
walls.
Meanwhile, the assault upon the Cothon
proved more promising.
It was here that just before winter, the
legions had battered down the enemies
outer defenses and erected their own
makeshift citadel.
Thus, as Scipio prepared his troops for
an assault upon the merchant section of
the harbor, the defending general
Hasdrubal was desperate for a way to
stop them.
With few men on hand to contest an
assault, he instead chose to set fire to
the warehouse facilities.
As these burned, they created a firewall
between Rome and Carthage.
The ploy worked in buying the defenders
time to secure their next fallback
position,
presumably on the inland side of the
merchant harbor.
However,
>> [music]
>> Gaius Laelius,
a deputy of Scipio, chose this moment to
retake [music] the initiative.
Leading a few detachments, he advanced
against the walls of the circular
military harbor. These were thick in
construction, but appear to have been
weakened by the temporary harbor exit
the Carthaginians had carved the
preceding year.
As the assailants approached, the
defenders raised an alarm.
They understood the frailty of the
position and now rushed to reinforce the
spaces of the Cothon with a mass of
piled timbers, scaffolding, and
discarded siege engines.
It was a desperate move to hold back the
coming tide of violence.
When this washed upon them, the
defenders [music] were pounded by its
intensity.
Guards, weakened by long months of
starvation, struggled to haul more
materials into place or to strike back
at the legions who hacked away at the
fortifications.
One must imagine the sinking feeling
[music] of dread which set in with each
pounding at the walls.
Carthaginians, who for over 2 years had
bravely held out against the Romans, now
found the last of their energy sapped in
the attempt to resist just one day
longer.
What could men do against such reckless
hate?
And so many slumped to the ground,
resigned to the inevitability of their
doom.
This
was the end.
Tanit,
Baal, guardians of the city, why have
you forsaken us to these demons?
Such were the desperate prayers of the
Carthaginians who faced Rome's final
assault upon their capital in 146 BC.
For 3 long years, the city had held out
against all odds. Though stripped of its
armies, its fleets, and its weapons of
war at the start of the conflict,
Carthage had fought back with the
ferocity of a lion.
No inch of ground was yielded without a
fight.
No assault went unanswered without a
counterattack.
No act of daring was unmatched by a
staunch resolve.
In this way, the Carthaginians had held
their ground and even threatened to
destroy the invaders outright on
multiple occasions.
But alas, against the crushing might of
Rome and its brilliant commander, Scipio
Aemilianus,
their efforts were ultimately in vain.
Starved of food, of soldiers, and of
hope,
the legions finally broke into the city.
Yet even then, the lion roared in
defiance.
What followed would be one of the most
brutal [music] chapters of urban warfare
ever recorded in antiquity.
From avenues to courtyards, bedrooms,
and rooftops, the sons and daughters of
Baal Hammon refused to yield to Rome's
advance all the way to the inner sanctum
of the acropolis.
This is the story of the heroic last
stand of Carthage.
In 146 BC, Scipio Aemilianus had been
honored with an extension to his command
of the legions in Africa.
He had but one mandate, to terminate the
siege of Carthage.
Thus it was that in the spring, his
troops had waged twin assaults upon the
vestiges of the city's defenses. One
thrust aiming [music] for the Bursa
Citadel and the other aiming for the
Cothon Harbor.
The latter of these had proved most
fruitful. The defenses on this front
having been softened by heavy fighting
the prior fall.
As the Romans pushed [music] into this
flank of the city, it began to cave.
Years of additional fighting and
starvation were showing their toll upon
the defenders who struggled to hold back
[music] the tide.
Along the merchant docks, Hasdrubal had
resorted to arson to slow the invaders.
Meanwhile, within the military docks
desperate Carthaginians attempted to
[music] pile up barricades as quickly as
they were being torn down.
But, it was not enough. Finally, after
three long years, the great dam of
Carthage was about to burst.
As the fires abated and the timbers
collapsed, the legions now poured into
the city.
First came Laelius's contingent. On
their own initiative, these had
penetrated into the military harbor.
Brushing aside feeble starving
defenders, they now took the first steps
within a city which had for so long
denied them.
Now, the soldiers flowed across the
harbor's circular interior
>> [music]
>> cutting down all who yet remained in the
facilities.
As they advanced, they would have had to
clear each of the ship sheds.
While many were empty, others likely
hosted the skeletal remains of the fleet
Carthage had hastily assembled the
previous winter.
Their parts long since having been
salvaged for other purposes.
Though of no military value,
these still might have served as refuge
for Punic defenders who had not managed
to find the exits fast enough.
Perhaps their best hope was to hide away
and shelter from the coming storm.
However, none would have been spared in
the adrenaline-fueled [music]
rampage of the troops.
For now, this fury was confined to the
perimeter of the docks as night was fast
approaching.
Thus it was that Scipio's contingent,
which had similarly been wading through
the wreck of the merchant harbor,
was forced to halt its advance.
They did so in the center of the nearby
forum.
On this open ground, the legions
established a perimeter of guards while
the main body hunkered down for the
night under full arms.
Few would have been able to sleep,
their veins coursing with the adrenaline
of fear and anticipation.
Here they were, after years of
anticipation,
laying in the very heart of Carthage.
Its twinkling lights sparkled around
them,
seemingly as numerous [music] as the
stars.
For this fleeting moment, an eerie
stillness came upon the world.
Meanwhile, the Carthaginians would have
spent an equally restless night.
Gathering in [music] their windows or on
their roofs,
the citizens peered out into the dark,
squinting to confirm the whispers which
were spreading like wildfire.
They are here.
The Romans
>> [music]
>> are inside the city.
It's hard to imagine what one would have
done in this situation.
The gravity of the moment must have
saturated the air with an intoxicating
miasma [music] of dread.
Likely many prayed to their gods for
mercy or salvation.
Others took actions into their own
hands. Militias rounded up the
able-bodied while passages were
barricaded and doorways boarded up as a
final line of protection.
Those unfit to fight meanwhile crammed
provisions into sacks and prepared to
make a break for it.
Either seeking refuge in some distant
corner of the city or atop the defensive
heights of the Byrsa Hill.
In an urban environment as vast as
Carthage, there would have been anywhere
[music] to run.
But nowhere to hide.
As dawn broke, the Roman army began to
stir.
However, for now the Carthaginians would
be granted a momentary stay [music] of
execution.
It seems that the waking legionaries had
their thoughts drift from guarded
battlements to unguarded temples.
Thus, as 4,000 fresh troops were brought
into the city to join them for the
assault, a sudden mutiny of greed
[music] gripped their ranks.
First in drips, then in droves, the
Roman army disintegrated into a mob
which began to ransack the surrounding
area.
Appian reports, quote,
"They entered the temple of Apollo,
whose statue was there covered with gold
in a shrine of beaten gold weighing
1,000 [music]
talents, which they plundered, chopping
it with their swords disregarding
[music] the commands of their officers
until they had divided it among
themselves.
Such fits of disorder were a common
occurrence among soldiers, especially
those who had finally reached a
breakthrough [music]
in a long siege.
It seems that this was fueled by both
the cathartic release of tension and the
fear of missing out on a chance to get
rich.
In either case, the loss of discipline
could prove dangerous and there are
numerous records of pillaging troops
having [music] been slaughtered by traps
and counterattacks on such occasions.
It was for this reason that the later
Roman army would enact strict bans on
looting and methodically collect the
spoils for redistribution so that
soldiers felt assured they would get
their share of the prize.
In this case, it seems that it would be
the officers and Scipio's iron will
which finally rallied the troops.
With a mound of treasures gathered in
the enemy's forum and the Acropolis as a
backdrop, we can imagine how this
charismatic [music] commander may have
addressed the men.
"Sons of Mars, what doubts have you in
victory and in spoils? It was you who
summoned me to this [music] task.
Have I not kept my words to you in these
long years? Have I not led you in valor
and in honor?
Now, I summon you to follow me.
The greatest glories yet await us atop
the heights. To arms! We have beaten
them before and when they see our
weapons and feel our spirit, they will
crack. Forget about this meager plunder.
Win and you shall have it all."
>> Thus, refocused in purpose, the legions
advanced against the Bursa.
It was an ancient bastion strengthened
by a natural hill, the city's oldest
walls, and a dense urban landscape.
Here, we are told that three main
streets led from the forum to the
fortress. These were flanked by tightly
packed six-story apartment complexes.
Within were the defenders who had turned
such structures into fortified towers.
From the windows and the roofs they now
hurled insults and missiles at the
approaching Romans.
Some attempt was made to advance through
the maelstrom. However, this was quickly
halted.
The Romans now targeted the first of
these tall buildings. Led by centurions,
small bodies of troops swarmed through
the colonnades of their ground floors.
As in Rome, these street-level spaces
would have been filled with market
stalls, bakeries, shops, and other small
businesses.
However,
these would have already been stripped
clear by this point in the siege,
leaving the troops nothing of value to
get their hands on.
But, the true prize was the building
itself.
Thus, the Romans would have sought out
the narrow winding staircases which led
up to higher levels.
Here is where resistance would have
proved stiff.
Defenders must have barricaded the
passages and set up traps to hamper the
assailants. Pushing through such tight
quarters while encumbered with full
armor, helmets, and shields would have
proved even more difficult. Perhaps
troops stripped down for breaching
efforts or even set up ladders to
clamber through windows to bypass this
first hurdle.
Whatever the case, it seems that they
could not be stopped.
As the Romans spilled out into the upper
levels, fighting would have devolved
into a chaotic close-quarters brawl.
Here, the struggle was deeply personal,
taking place face-to-face in the very
bedrooms of the Carthaginians. As this
wave of violence slowly filled the
building, any surviving defenders would
have sought refuge atop higher ground,
firing as they went or dropping heavy
objects upon the intruders.
Ultimately, the brawl [music] culminated
in fighting atop the very roof of the
building.
A desperate last stand was made in full
view of the city.
From neighboring heights, the defenders
lent support as best they could, but
soon the last of the holdouts was slain.
One building down, dozens [music] to go.
Appian carries the narrative,
quote,
"When they had mastered the first, they
threw timbers from one to the other over
the narrow [music] passageways and
crossed as on bridges.
While war was raging in this way on
[music] the roofs,
another fight was going on among those
who met each other in the streets below.
All places were filled with groans,
shrieks, shouts, and every kind of
[music] agony.
Some were stabbed, others were hurled
alive from the roofs to the pavement,
some of them alighting on the heads of
spears or other pointed weapons or
swords.
No one dared to set fire to the houses
on account of those who were still on
the [music] roofs until Scipio reached
the Byrsa.
It's at this point that the Roman
commander reformed his troops to take
the Acropolis
in what would become a siege within a
siege. The attackers first found out to
surround the fortifications.
Next, orders were given to set fire to
the surrounding structures both to burn
out any last defenders [music] and to
clear a path for the army's advance.
The devastation of this mass arson
should not be underestimated.
Here, Appian brings color to the
nightmare.
Quote,
"Then came new scenes of horror
as the fire spread and carried
everything down. The soldiers did not
wait to destroy the buildings little by
little, but all in a heap.
So, the crashing grew louder and many
corpses fell with the stones into the
midst.
Others were seen still living,
especially old men,
women, and young children who had hidden
in the inmost nooks of the houses.
Some of them wounded, some more or less
burned and uttering pitious cries.
Still others thrust out and falling from
such a height with the stones, timbers,
and fire were torn asunder in all shapes
of horror, crushed and mangled.
Nor was this the end of their miseries
[music]
for the street cleaners who were
removing the rubbish with axes,
mattocks, and forks and making the roads
passable tossed with these instruments
the dead and the living together into
holes in the ground,
dragging them along like sticks and
stones and turning them over with their
iron tools.
Trenches were filled [music] with men.
Some who were thrown in headfirst with
their legs sticking out of the ground
writhed a long time.
Others fell with their feet downward and
their heads above ground. Horses ran
over them crushing their faces and
skulls.
Not purposely on the part of the riders,
but in their headlong haste.
Nor did the street cleaners do these
things on purpose.
But the tug-of-war,
the glory of approaching [music]
victory, the rush of soldiery, the
orders of the officers, the blast of the
trumpets, tribunes, and centurions
marching their cohorts hither and
thither,
all together made everybody frantic and
heedless of the spectacles under their
eyes.
It's difficult to read a passage like
this and not be moved.
This was a scene of unimaginable
brutality.
A moment when the gods of mercy
had utterly abandoned [music] the
Carthaginians
to a foe which had shed all vestiges of
its humanity to become the very
incarnation of death itself.
It's a scene of hell on earth.
One which would be repeated over and
over again in this final chapter of the
siege.
Appian reports, quote,
"Six days and nights were consumed in
this kind of fighting.
The soldiers being changed so that they
would not be worn out with toil,
slaughter, want of sleep, and these
horrid sights.
Scipio alone toiled without rest,
hurrying here and there without sleep,
taking food while he was at work,
until
utterly fatigued and relaxed,
he sat down on a high place where he
could overlook the efforts.
From such heights, the commander would
have been able to surveil not just the
Byrsa Hill, but also the surrounding
districts of the grand city.
Taking these would require similarly
grueling urban warfare.
It is said that Scipio estimated the
fighting might stretch on for many more
days to completely extinguish the
enclaves of survivors.
But, one way or the other, he was
determined to see things through.
Carthage must be destroyed.
For the defenders, the bleak
inevitability of their doom was all too
apparent.
No quarter was [music] being given.
Every inch taken by the Romans drove
them closer to oblivion.
Without a doubt, the city was lost, and
if nothing was done, so too would its
people.
Thus it was that on the seventh day of
hell, the surviving leadership of
Carthage atop the Byrsa Hill finally
offered to surrender.
From its hallowed doors emerged an
embassy. They bore olive [music]
branches and sacred garlands of
Asclepius.
These descended through the ruins of the
city in a grim procession to the Roman
lines.
Here they were met by Scipio.
While the conqueror had thus far shown a
monstrous appetite for violence, he was
also [music] capable of mercy.
The appeals to save the lives of the
Carthaginian citizens was [music]
granted.
50,000 men, women, and children now
emerged from the gates of the Byrsa.
Under the careful watch of guards, these
were escorted to the rear of the siege
lines.
However, not all were granted clemency.
In particular were the nearly 1,000
Roman deserters who, at one point or
another over the three-year siege, had
found themselves switching sides.
These, we are told, took final refuge
within the temple complex of Asclepius
with the general Hasdrubal and his
family.
Yet, in a cruel twist of fate, the
oath-breakers [music] would find
themselves betrayed.
In secret, Hasdrubal slipped from their
side [music] to that of the Romans,
begging for his life.
Thereupon, Scipio had him brought before
the temple to kneel at his feet in
[music] full view of the deserters and
his own family.
Scipio then quieted his troops, giving
time for the last [music] defenders to
hurl the most vile of curses and insults
at the emasculated general.
It was a calculated, humiliating act of
dominance.
This ritual of conquest culminated with
the remaining Carthaginians making one
last act of resistance.
They now set fire to the temple of
Asclepius, the very heart and soul of
the city, to deny the Romans a chance to
claim its loot or their lives.
In this raging funeral pyre of a once
great empire, stood the defiant [music]
wife of Hasdrubal.
Appian records her final words, quote,
"For you, Roman,
the gods have no cause of indignation,
since you exercise the rights of war.
Upon this, Hasdrubal, betrayer of his
country [music] and her temples, of me
and his children, may the gods of
Carthage take vengeance and you be their
instrument."
Then, turning to Hasdrubal,
"Wretch!" she exclaimed.
"Traitor, most effeminate of men, this
fire will entomb me and my children.
Will you, the leader of great Carthage,
decorate a Roman triumph?
Ah, what punishment will you not receive
from him at whose feet you are now
sitting?"
Having reproached him thus,
she slew her children, flung them into
the fire, and plunged in after them.
It was over.
At long last, the siege of Carthage had
ended.
The momentous nature of this event was
not lost upon Scipio, who feared that
one day the same doom would come for
Rome.
Appian remarks on his thoughts [music]
as follows,
quote,
"Scipio,
when he looked upon the city as it was
utterly perishing and in the last throws
[music] of its complete destruction,
is said to have shed tears
and wept openly for his enemies.
After being wrapped in thought for long
and realizing that all cities, nations,
and authorities must, like men, meet
their doom, that this happened to Ilium,
once a prosperous city, to the empires
of Assyria, Media, and Persia,
the greatest of their time, and to
Macedonia itself,
either deliberately or the verses
escaping him, he said,
"A day will come when sacred Troy shall
perish
and Priam and his people shall be slain.
But
as Scipio sat musing of the future,
the corpse of Carthage was still warm.
What would become of its ruins, of its
people, and of its legacy?
For now you can catch script previews
and download HD versions of our art on
Patreon and YouTube memberships. A big
thanks to the current supporters and to
the researchers, writers, and artists
for making this episode possible. We
couldn't have done it without this
[music] team and this community.
If you enjoyed this episode, be sure to
like and subscribe for more content and
check out these other related videos.
[music]
See you in the next one.
>> [music]